---
layout: post
title: Vim Most Used Commands
---

Lately at work we've been using a combination of [vim][]/[tmux][] to make
pair programming a lot easier.  This is especially helpful when working
remotely or under a crappy internet connection, as you won't need a lot
of bandwidth.

While both vim and tmux allow you to highly customize your shortcuts,
changing them too much will make your pair's life harder, since they'll
have to memorize _your_ specific shortcuts, so keeping the defaults will
make everybody's lives easier.

vim is a big beast on its own, but in a good way.  You can find a huge number of
plugins out there that will make you go crazy, so to keep sanity levels to a
maximum, I use a single one: [Janus][].

Janus bundles together a lot of really useful plugins to make a devs' life
simpler (fuzzy search, ack, git commands, additional syntaxes, and more).  As
such, most (if not all) shortcuts I list here will really only work with it:


    :new                      # open a new file
    :e path/to/file           # edit specific file
    :w                        # save file
    :q                        # quit/close file
    CTRL+p                    # fuzzy search and open file
    :%s/search/replace/g      # search and replace
    :Ack <search>             # find <search> in all files

    :set foldmethod=indent    # fold according to indent
    :set foldlevel=1          # defaults to folding first level

    CTRL+wv                   # split window vertically
    CTRL+ws                   # split window horizontally
    \n                        # open file tree

    H                         # Move cursor to top of the screen
    M                         # Move cursor to middle of the screen
    L                         # Move cursor to bottom of the screen
    CTRL+d                    # Move half a page down
    CTRL+u                    # Move half a page up

    d<move>                   # delete <move>
    y<move>                   # copy <move>
    c<move>                   # change <move>
    .                         # repeat last command
    zO                        # open all folds under cursor
    zo                        # open first fold level under cursor
    zc                        # close current fold block
    zx                        # close all but current fold block
    <<                        # unindent line/block
    >>                        # indent line/block
    p                         # paste contents after/before current line

    gg                        # move to first line of the file
    G                         # move to last line of the file
    w                         # move one word forward
    b                         # move one word backward
    t<char>                   # move just before <char>
    f<char>                   # move to find <char> in the current line
    ^                         # move to first character in the line

    v                         # create visual block
    V                         # create visual block with whole lines
    CTRL+v                    # create a vertical block

    \gb                       # git blame current file
    \gs                       # git status


These are all the commands I can remember using _all the time_.  I believe this
short list will make it possible for the newcomers out there to try and give vim
a change and get passed the --incredibly-- steep learning curve (compared to other,
more visual, editors out there).

Let me know if you have any commands that you use all the time as well!


[vim]: http://www.vim.org/download.php
  "Visit vim website"
[tmux]: http://tmux.sourceforge.net/
  "Visit tmux website"
[janus]: https://github.com/carlhuda/janus
  "Visit Janus project"
